## Welcome!
By Jacob Love

### Projects:


# Project1 KnickKnack
[Example of the primary app running on a smartphone](https://github.com/JacobLove1/Site/blob/92f249924df36d2dbf9b63fa88e0eae7505a9ea3/Screenshot_20210920-135740_KnickKnack.jpg)\
[Example of the Ground Plane app running on a smartphone](https://github.com/JacobLove1/Site/blob/92f249924df36d2dbf9b63fa88e0eae7505a9ea3/Screenshot_20210918-161930_Ground.jpg)\
This project uses Vuforia and Unity to create two knickknacks, akin to something you would find in a gift 
shop but with some added technological flare. The two locations depicted are Kennedy Space Center and the pyramid Castillo de Kukulcán, which each feature a 3D representation of the actual location (a rocket and the pyramid respectively). In addition to the standard likeness, both knickknacks give the weather at each location, and if it is raining at the location it will be raining on the model (or rain can be triggered from the raindrop buttons in the app). The Kennedy Space Center model even plays Gustav Holst’s Mars to set the atmosphere and the rocket will launch if you press the red button. They also both function as magic 8 balls, allowing the user to turn them over and back to get a new saying. A simple smartphone application allows anyone to print out the base cubes and view these AR knickknacks through their phone as though the paper cubes were models of each location.\
A second application allows the user to take the Kennedy Space Center knickknack and place a supersized version of it wherever they would like by detecting the ground with the smartphone camera and simulating the model on a click.\
-[KnickKnack Code](https://github.com/JacobLove1/TrinketProject)\
-[Instillation Guide](https://github.com/JacobLove1/Site/blob/534d40d4d764ac0622a1dc6864ba73545bf9137e/Instillation%20Instructions.docx)\
-[KnickKnack Project Credits](https://github.com/JacobLove1/Site/blob/main/VRCREDITS.txt)\
-[List of self-designed models](https://github.com/JacobLove1/Site/blob/51c68821b93d8a0f5fc4ad27239d63b827c7491a/Self%20Designed%20Models.pdf)\
-[KnickKnack Project Video](https://youtu.be/L9n7vWq3tWQ)\
-[Model descriptions and custom 8-ball sayings](https://github.com/JacobLove1/Site/blob/20532df4fbc2def1a0937a222ce9c0f5bf21322a/Model%20depiction%20and%208ball%20description.docx)\
-[AR object popularity paper](https://github.com/JacobLove1/Site/blob/534d40d4d764ac0622a1dc6864ba73545bf9137e/The%20future%20of%20AR.docx)

# Project2 ScareCo
This project uses the VRTK package in Unity to create a VR experience designed for the Oculus Quest. The project simulates a fictional startup, “ScareCo,” that is using various objects such as toys and boardgames to help people get over their fear of family game night. The company is using their friendly environment to slowly introduce people to family games to alleviate their fear, and if the patient were to run to a single-player game such as the nearby arcade console they are discouraged as more board games are generated.\
The environment features a highly interactable environment with a fully functional chess board with sound effects, various game facades, a Gameboy that plays the Tetris theme music, an oversized gaming die with sound, alongside others. Outside the ScareCo building there a garden scene enclosed in a glass dome with the universe slowly swirling around. A full list of models, links to the project, instillation instructions, and a video demo are available below.\
-[ScareCo Code](https://github.com/JacobLove1/ScareCO.git)\
-[Project Video](https://youtu.be/cNBYeYwCPxs)\
-[Instillation Guide](https://github.com/JacobLove1/Site/blob/fa9cc5f457e1b987e63d165c5b570a987ac394d5/Instillation%20InstructionsP2.docx)\
-[Assets list and asset credits](https://github.com/JacobLove1/Site/blob/cb8464e757c7d6357ab0134ef6d52d77b461a515/VRP2Assets.docx)\
-[Framerate discussion](https://github.com/JacobLove1/Site/blob/b0f1967ae7dd1c30699352a01417750b93dc3f39/FramerateP2.docx)\
-[Simulator vs VR](https://github.com/JacobLove1/Site/blob/d781fa52cdf8b104d5515266d7738fc8ccf63a00/Simulated%20vs%20headset%20VR.docx)

# Student Choice
## Topic Page:
VR4FND\
VR Prosthesis Embodiment studies has shown that amputee patients can reduce phantom limb related issues and embody their prosthetics by assuming a virtual prosthetic in VR and training the patient using the simulation that certain sensory cues mean certain types of feedback. 
A prosthetic cannot “feel” in the traditional sense, but it can stimulate the remaining portion of the patient’s limb through small vibrations or other stimuli. Phantom limb syndrome, the feeling that their missing limb is still intact and certain sensations are felt in the phantom limb, is a functional neurological disorder (FND) that can cause patients to feel phantom pain and interpret stimuli to other parts of the body as touches to their nonexistent limb in a process called limb telescoping. Experiments simulating the prosthetic and allowing the patient to interact while feeling the prosthetic feedback in real life while seeing an entirely virtual body have shown promise in training those who experience limb telescoping to experience stimuli from their prosthetic as stimulation to the phantom limb that it replaced, decreasing discomfort and allowing for a “real” sensory experience.\
Since 2016, 30 patients at Stanford have been involved in clinical trials for such a technology called VR4FND .
VR4FND is an experimental therapy application that is in clinical trials which uses this VR prosthetic limb therapy to treat FND’s by immersing the patient in a VR mirror visual feedback system, that is a VR environment that mirrors actual motions, and provide the patient with actual touches on their body synchronized with a glowing light on the portion of the body the sensation would be correlated to in order to train the brain that a touch on a certain point, say a buzz on their amputated arm, correlated to a touch on the prosthetic, say the fingertip.\
The technology is still undergoing clinical trials which are projected to conclude December of this year with results projected by January 2022.\
[General informational news article about VR treatment for amputees](https://www.mobihealthnews.com/content/researchers-pair-vr-tactile-prosthetics-fight-amputees-phantom-limb-sensations)\
[Multisensory bionic limb to achieve prosthesis embodiment and reduce distorted phantom limb perceptions](https://jnnp.bmj.com/content/90/7/833)\
[Preliminary feasibility study for VR to treat FND](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31687867/)\
[Clinical trial documentation for VR4FND](https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02764476)



# VR therapy for amputees:
###### Background:
A [functional neurological disorder](https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/fnd/) (FND) is a disorder where sensory input and the brain’s perception of that input are mismatched. The most well-known FND is phantom limb syndrome, which is when an amputee experiences sensations on other parts of the body or from nowhere at all as sensations occurring in their missing limb. These sensations can be uncomfortable at best and painful at worst.\
A common manifestation of phantom limb is a so-called "telescoping limb" where the patient’s brain interprets the signals from the remaining nerve endings as corresponding to a nonexistent smaller version of their missing appendage. Telescoping limb is often progressive is correlated with increases in phantom pain.\
Historical treatment:\
Telescoping limb has been treated in the past by setting up camera on the head of a mannequin and over the head of the patient. The therapist would then touch the mannequin and the person in the same place at the same time so their brain would embody the mannequin. They would then touch the limb on the mannequin attempting to trick the brain into interpreting the phantom limb at full scale. This process is called virtual mirror therapy. \
VR:\
Several groups have been working on using VR as a potential outlet for similar therapy for phantom limb patients. The projects very slightly in method, but the basic premise of these therapies is like the historical treatment: by putting an amputee with a prosthetic limb into a VR environment and simulating their body and their prosthetic they can refocus the misperceived sensation as coming from the prosthetic. The goal is twofold: to alleviate the discomfort of sensations from within a mis-sized nonexistent body part by ascribing those sensations to the existing, albeit artificial, prosthetic limb, and to encourage embodiment of the prosthetic.\
The first commercial launch of this technology is called VR4FND and is projected to launch at the end of the year.
###### Why use VR:
VR is a natural extension to the traditional therapy as it allows the user to more easily embody the artificial body. For the treatment to work, the patient must convince their brain that an artificial body is theirs. VR provides a more convincing platform for assuming an artificial body.\
In the traditional treatment a mannequin was used as the artificial body, and although there had been success with using headsets and cameras alongside sensory stimulation to have patients embody the mannequin the patient had to pose exactly as the mannequin was posed and look in the direction the mannequin was looking. VR allows for the artificial body to mimic the actions of the patient, moving with them, tracking their head and limb movements and overall giving a more convincing illusion.\
Moreover, VR allows for virtual experiences tailored to the therapy that are difficult or unrealistic in the real world. In the mannequin study, simultaneous touches to the mannequins and the patient were used to facilitate embodiment. In VR, therapists can use indicators such as a light appearing on the body where the therapist touches to indicate a touch, and that indicator can then be programmed to appear on the prosthetic indicating where the patient should experience their phantom limb. Even without prosthetics, therapist can simulate actions with the missing limb by mirroring actions of their intact limb from other sessions as the patient moves allowing the patient to see their missing limb as if it were there in the hopes that their FND would be alleviated.\
Essentially, VR provides the most realistic environment available for embodying an avatar. Beyond that, the ability to use programming to alter the VR world in any way which suits the therapy makes it far more versatile over conventional treatments.
###### Who are its intended users?
It may seem obvious that the users are amputees, but this technology in its current form is not a catch all treatment for anyone missing a limb. These treatments are specifically for phantom limb, and while phantom limb is common in amputees, many cease to experience the sensation after a few weeks. Moreover, the treatments so far seem most effective in patients experiencing telescoping phantom limb which makes up an even smaller group.\ 
Most of the existing studies focus on patients missing arms or hands, and while it seems like the treatments could, in principle, transfer to those missing legs the design of some treatments requires standing and would need to be altered.\
Some studies suggest more general applications, particularly for prosthetic embodiment and pain reduction in phantom limbs at large. There is still too little research available to determine if these applications are effective or if the usefulness of VR will be limited to telescoping limb therapy.\
###### What are the issues with it?
While this technology is undoubtedly exciting, it faces some serious limitations. These limitations can be divided into hardware challenges, and efficacy challenges.\
Hardware challenges:\
The first issue with the hardware is availability. VR headsets are expensive at best, and these therapies require specialized headsets to track movement without having a pair of hands. Some groups have used commercial headsets with body tracking and specialized software to dodge the issue, while others made specialized headsets designed for the treatment, but until VR4FND is released there is no commercial option for this equipment, so each group needs to design their own. This alone seriously hampers availability of this technology and has limited its use to research circles.\
Expense itself is a limiting factor, although not as large an issue as it might initially seem. Assuming commercially available equipment hits the market, prior treatments already required specialized headsets and cameras. They were not head or body tracking and were likely less expensive than the VR setups, but as VR becomes more commonplace it is not difficult to imagine that tools like headsets become more cost effective as well. One study looking at leg amputees suggested that it was significantly cheaper to use VR in its current state than to use prior treatment methods.\
Although general purpose VR equipment is becoming more affordable, another hardware issue is specialization. While the treatments, especially those focused specifically on telescoping limb, seek to use VR in similar ways the patients themselves have vastly different needs. Fully simulating a nonexistent limb may work for patients with complete amputations, but patients may have partially intact limbs that, if their movements are not matched in VR, can destroy the illusion necessary for the treatment to work. Not only that, but many who suffer from phantom limb only struggle in the presence of certain triggers which must be recreated for therapy to be effective.\
Inability to recreate triggers is just one of many issues plaguing the efficacy of this technology as a treatment. One study used YouTube 360 to simulate triggers, and in one of their patients there was no available content that could trigger their phantom limb and so the therapy was ineffective for them. Another study which focused on prosthetic embodiment voiced similar concerns, as the therapy revolving around tactile stimulation can be difficult to reproduce although they argued that it may be possible to achieve positive results without linking the VR experience directly to the real (i.e., just the visual of interacting with the limb in VR may be enough without additional stimulation or other triggers). One study suggested that the largest obstacle to VR treatments of phantom limb pain in that phantom pain is highly unpredictable which makes it difficult to study effectively.\
Another efficacy concern is that in redirecting the phantom limb to a virtual one the therapy is not really treating the disorder at all. Simply reshaping the minds idea of the phantom limb to match a normally sized limb or prosthetic is still leaving the patient with a phantom limb. These studies report that in doing so, they decrease patient discomfort and/or help with prosthetic embodiment but there is no bulletproof way to test patient discomfort but to have the patient report it and self-reported metrics are notoriously unreliable. Indeed, the study focusing on prosthetic embodiment pointed out that although they had showed patients report less discomfort and greater embodiment, it is unclear if embodiment of a prosthetic is what makes a person comfortable with their prosthetic. That said, treatment of pain alone is likely sufficient to cement VR as a viable treatment for these disorders.\
Finally, the one concerned voiced across every study I found was the lack of data. All the limitations mentioned so far make it difficult for studies on VR treatments to occur. Medical studies revolving around human patients often struggle to accrue reasonable sample sizes, and those looking to address a relatively narrow group like these phantom limb studies had even smaller sample sizes. Not only that, but the understanding of VR technology also required alongside a medical background in phantom pain treatment is rare. These factors together mean that although initial results look promising, there is no telling if these treatments will prove to be effective at a larger scale.
###### Conclusions:
Despite the limitations of hardware and efficacy, VR seems to be the future of treatment for phantom limb. It may not be a miracle cure, but it does not have to be, it must only be an improvement on existing technology to be adopted. While there are many obstacles that remain, the technology seems to be almost strictly better than previous treatments, so as it becomes more widely available it is hard to imagine it will not be used.
###### Consulted articles:
Dave Muoio **Researchers pair VR, tactile prosthetics to fight amputees' phantom limb sensations** https://www.mobihealthnews.com/content/researchers-pair-vr-tactile-prosthetics-fight-amputees-phantom-limb-sensations \
Elisabetta Ambron et. al. **Immersive Low-Cost Virtual Reality Treatment for Phantom Limb Pain: Evidence from Two Cases** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5825921/ \
Healthwise Staff **Phantom Limb Pain and Chronic Pain** https://www.uofmhealth.org/health-library/ty6877 \
Giulio Rognini1 et. al. **Multisensory bionic limb to achieve prosthesis embodiment and reduce distorted phantom limb perceptions** https://jnnp.bmj.com/content/jnnp/90/7/833.full.pdf \
Kim Bullock **Embodied Virtual Reality Therapy for Functional Neurological Symptom/ Conversion Disorder (VR4FND)** https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02764476 \
Kim Bullock et al. **Virtual Reality-Delivered Mirror Visual Feedback and Exposure Therapy for FND: A Midpoint Report of a Randomized Controlled Feasibility Study**\ https://neuro.psychiatryonline.org/doi/10.1176/appi.neuropsych.19030071?url_ver=Z39.88-2003&rfr_id=ori:rid:crossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%20%200pubmed \
Laura Schmalzl **“Pulling Telescoped Phantoms Out of the Stump”: Manipulating the Perceived Position of Phantom Limbs Using a Full-Body Illusion** https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3206583/ \
NORD **Functional Neurological Disorder** https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/fnd/ \
Susha Cheriyedath **What is a Phantom Limb?** https://www.news-medical.net/health/What-is-a-Phantom-Limb.aspx \
Thomas Rutledge et al. **A Virtual Reality Intervention for the Treatment of Phantom Limb Pain: Development and Feasibility Results** https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article/20/10/2051/5511535




